#summary Ela development roadmap.
#labels Featured,Phase-Requirements

This article contains a roadmap for the upcoming versions of Ela Platform.

== Platform 2012.8 (Released) ==

August 2012

  * Support for lazy patterns.
  * Support for overloading class functions by return type.
  * Use constants as well as function as class members.
  * Performance optimizations for algebraic types construction.
  * Redesign of `StringBuilder` data type (ease of use, effeciency).

== Platform 2012.9 ==

September 2012

  * New version of the book _Ela, dynamic functional language_, covering all the recent changes in the language, including algebraic types and classes.
  * New "getting started" style documentation and tutorials.
  * Bring back validation of `match` entries for overlapping.
  * Redesign of logical operators (`and`, `or`) and sequencing operator `($)`, which are currently presented as special forms, not as functions.  
  * New function application operators.
  * New types classes: `Functor` (generalization of `map`), `Foldable` (generalization of `fold`), `Union` (generalization of `concat`), etc. and their instances, including generic default instances.
  * Final version of Ela reflection API, minor redesign in modules `generic` and `reflect`.

== Platform 2012.10 ==

November 2012
  
  * Monads, `do` notation for monads.
  * `IO` monad, redesign of existing modules to work through `IO` monad.
  * Extend standard library with new modules (collections, IO functions, etc.)
  * A benchmarking suite for Ela.
  * First public release of Eladoc, Ela documentation utility based on literate code syntax (will be integrated with Elide).

== Platform 2012.11 ==

December 2012

  * The core modules from standard library will be shipped in precompiled form in addition to source code.
  * Decimal (128 bit) numeric type.
  * Arbitrary precision integer type.